---
layout: post
title: "Updates, Restarting my Compiler and Shifting Interests"
---
# Preamble, TL;DR
It's been a while since I've done a project/post and I intend to (re)start my projects.

# ....
It has been a while since I last wrote a blog post and the interim period their has been two major developments in my personal life.

1. I graduated from my MEng Computer Science program at the University of Bristol. This is a pretty big life step and it ends 4 years of 
thankless but satisfying work. One of the main highlights of which was getting to do research into programming languages in particular 
I worked on a research compiler for verified cryptography called [EasyCrypt](https://www.easycrypt.info/trac/). The dissertation for my work is actually available on this website [here](https://nasherm.github.io/2020/07/16/diss.html). I am thankful for everything I learnt as a student, and I'm looking forward to building on my foundations.

2. Which brings me to my next milestone which is that I started working for [Arm](https://www.arm.com/), in particular I'll be working on high performance computing(HPC) software. 

Now that I am fully rested from finishing University, settled into my new workplace, and I've started to find a rhythym, I have turned my attention to what's next. And as such I have a decently sized backlog of projects and a growing reading list. One such project that I started a year and a half ago was the [compiler for the C0 programming language](https://nasherm.github.io/2019/09/27/c0-compiler-lexer.html). That project acted as a way for me to not only develop my skills in the Rust programming language, but to also learn more about compiler construction. And although it has given me a lot of useful knowledge in Rust development I found myself looking at the project after a long hiatus and realising that it would be best to move away from Rust. As such, I have decided to implement the compiler in Haskell. A few months ago I wrote an entire parser and setup a Haskell tech stack, and if you go to the project repo [here](https://github.com/nasherm/c0hs) you can see the updated state( I will write another blog post about the parser soon). Next steps will be developing semantic assignment. My reasoning for moving away from Rust were partly pragmatic and partly preference. I do believe Rust to be an amazing language to work with, but for my personal interests I don't think I can effectively achieve what I want to by tying myself to it. I predict a future where I revisit Rust development, but for now it has been put partly to bed.


This project alongside other secret and not-so-secret projects are my primary focus as of writing this. They are all decently large and as such I predict I will have a lot to blog about. There are also multiple subjects that I plan to read and learn about and I will most likely blog about those out of curiosity. It should be noted that my interests as a CS major have narrowed over the year as I found my 'niche'. If you are interested in programming language design and implementation (especially functional programming), computer architecture, and HPC there's no doubt I will have something for you. Machine learning and cryptography will most likely not get as much attention from me.

Globally speaking, the pandemic has drastically changed the way that we currently live our lives and has made a lot of our collective futures quite murky. I'm grateful that I've had a family that have been a great source of strength in these testing times, but I recognise how lucky I am to be in such a situation. I hope that whoever is reading this is keeping safe and thank you for reading.
